[Music]
hey here's another creature feature for
you
check out these 8 facts about the
creature that cannot die as far as we
know earth is the only planet in our
solar system our galaxy and potentially
our entire universe that sustains life
the only planet where upon Native life
flourishes and grows forms complex
societies and even launches itself into
space to explore the deeper mysteries of
our universe humanity is tough
industrious and imaginative as a species
we are practically indestructible at
this point unless we do ourselves in
with war or climate change but what if
we told you that humans were not the
toughest creatures out there and that
the existence of more powerful
life-forms suggests the presence of life
beyond our world here at bright side
we've identified an incredibly tough
incredibly fascinating creature that you
just have to know about meet the
tardigrade one of the most resilient
animals in the world and possibly the
universe here are some facts you need to
know about the tardigrade number one
it's also called the water-bearer
ah that sounds so cute hmm no that's not
the water bear we mean actually a
tardigrade is commonly called a water
bear because it is most often found in
water where it prefers to dwell and
because of its slow gait which resembles
that of a bear it doesn't look much like
a bear but more like a miniature
caterpillar with five body segments and
four pairs of clawed legs clawed legs
wasn't there a famous actor from
Casablanca with the same name oh that's
Claude Rains never mind
the name tardigrade comes from
tardigrade a-- which means slow stepper
after the tardigrades casual ponderous
steps hey when you're the tiniest animal
around and you can survive pretty much
anything we guess
don't have to move fast right the
tardigrade is also sometimes called a
moss piglet which is just too adorable
for words
well beauty is in the eye of the
beholder number two it's really small
well technically you can't see a
tardigrade with the naked eye it's tiny
like really itsy-bitsy insect tiny house
flies are usually six to seven
millimeters long which is enormous
compared to the tardigrade the common
flea grows up to three millimeters long
and the smallest known mosquitoes and
ticks are about two millimeters in
length about the size of a pinhead a
tick larvae is typically somewhat less
than one millimeter long making it about
the same size as a poppy seed the
biggest full-grown tardigrade is about
that size and maybe a little less
measuring about 0.5 millimeters or about
one fiftieth of an inch that's really
any bitty
if you want to check out some of these
little critters we recommend at least a
low-power microscope number three
it's really really old the earliest
fossils we have of the tardigrade
species date back to the Cambrian period
some 530 million years ago during this
period of time Earth started to see the
advent of complex multicellular
organisms and it's from the Cambrian
period that we see the first fossils of
mineralized organisms the first metazoan
species microscopic animals emerged
during this era including the tardigrade
the Cambrian era was not one we'd easily
recognize the oceans teemed with life in
a kind of microbial soup well the dry
rocky land was all but barren of life
there was no vegetation the seas were
fairly warm and polar ice was
intermittent as Earth went through
several periods of glaciation where the
ice covered it and then melted away
number four it can live anywhere due to
its unique resilience in all sorts of
seemingly uninhabitable conditions the
tardigrade can survive almost anywhere
tardigrades have been found on the
high-altitude peaks of the Himalayas in
deep trenches in the oceans in mud
volcanoes and in tropical rainforests
most tardigrades have distinct
biological sexes which must work
together to reproduce the eggs are
especially Hardy being tough enough to
survive transport across vast distances
now that's handy if they get caught on
an animal or a passing traveler baby
tardigrades are born fully formed they
don't produce new cells as they grow but
the cells they already have expand
instead this process is called
hypertrophy and prompts tardigrades to
molt leaving their outer layer behind a
bit like a snake shedding its skin
excuse me while I slip into something
more comfortable number five it's mostly
harmless the tardigrade prefers to live
among mosses and lichens which are rich
in its favorite meals plant cells algae
and small invertebrates often other
tardigrades oh don't worry
they're not going to be harming humans
anytime soon mostly tardigrades are
helpful in populating new environments
named a pioneer species what they do is
move into a new environment and help to
establish an ecosystem
not unlike a gold prospector setting up
shop out in the frontier and just as
prospectors do their presence attracts
other animals in this case in
vertebrates which in turn attract
predators before too long there's a
thriving community and food chain where
there might have been nothing before
what friendly water bears
tardigrades typically live about 3 to 4
months up to two years not counting the
time they spend in dormant States
because some nosy scientists decided to
test their endurance
speaking of which number six
it's practically unkillable as
demonstrated by a lot of scientific
experimentation the tardigrade can
survive in some pretty extreme
environments which would kill and in
some cases cook any other animal through
a process called cryptobiosis which
suspends their metabolism many
tardigrades can enter a dehydrated state
to survive almost
any dangerous outside environment they
curl up into a barrel shape their bodies
become glass-like and they put
themselves in stasis during which time
they're pretty much indestructible
certain species of tardigrade can
survive exposure to extreme temperatures
extremely high or low pressure air
deprivation radiation dehydration
starvation or Kardashian well maybe not
that last one basically anything that
would kill a human being a tardigrade
would just shrug off and go about its
business temperature in terms of heat
tardigrades can survive a few minutes at
a little over 300 degrees Fahrenheit
meaning you could cook them in your oven
for a bit and they'd be okay an hour in
boiling water which is only 212 degrees
Fahrenheit not a problem just another
day at the spa when it comes to cold
they can last 30 years at -4 degrees
Fahrenheit and a few days at minus 328
degrees Fahrenheit which is
significantly colder than anywhere on
earth they can even live a few minutes
at minus 458 degrees Fahrenheit which is
just a bit colder than absolute zero the
temperature at which all matter ceases
to move they can also live in liquid
oxygen and liquid helium for significant
periods of time pressure you know how
when you go swimming the water feels
heavier the lower you go for every 33
feet that you go down below water the
pressure increases by about 14.5 pounds
per square inch or one atmosphere of
pressure how much the air presses down
on you at sea level at 130 feet or about
9 atmospheres even the best divers can
only survive a few minutes without
taking action by contrast
tardigrades can survive upward of 1,200
atmospheres and some species can survive
upward of 6,000 atmospheres nearly 6
times the pressure in the Mariana Trench
the deepest part of the ocean they can
also survive in low pressure situations
such as the vacuum of space
tardigrades in space have been measured
to live at least 10 days including solar
radiation
and speaking of radiation radiation
let's speak of that tardigrades can
withstand some 1000 times the radiation
of normal animals dying only when
exposed to 5000 Gy of gamma rays or
6,200 Gy of heavy ions by comparison a
human could easily die from 5 to 10 Gy
of exposure they seem to possess the
ability to repair radiation damage to
their DNA very efficiently dehydration
isn't this Pleasant
tardigrades can survive while completely
dried for nearly 10 years and possibly
longer
one subject was allegedly observed to
move after 120 years spent in dried moss
tardigrades can survive freeze drying
when exposed to extreme cold their body
secretes water going from 85% water to
3% so they don't explode as the water
freezes in their bodies and if that
wasn't cool enough for you outer space
tardigrades were the first animal
demonstrated to survive in space in 2007
a group of astronauts on the photon m3
mission conducting astrobiological
research expose several groups of
tardigrades to a hard vacuum only to
revive them back on earth through
hydration not all of them made it but
even the fact that some did is like
something out of science fiction the
experiment did find a potential weakness
in the tardigrades high-energy UV
radiation which significantly reduced
survival rates so if a giant tardigrade
is coming after you maybe you can use
that good luck so why do we study
tardigrades well very few animals can
achieve cryptobiosis which basically
entails shutting down their bodies and
internal functions with the intention of
eventually reviving this ability has
clear implications for the study of
cryogenic preservation so if you wake up
in a few hundred years still a little
shaky from cryo sleep you probably have
a tardigrade to thank number seven it
survives extinction events over the
course of its billions of years lifespan
earth has seen at least five mass
extinction events the one you're
probably most familiar with is the
Cretaceous tertiary extinction which
wiped out the dinosaurs and most other
complex life forms at the time leading
to a massive ice age that all but
destroyed all life on the planet the
tardigrade has survived all of them from
the Ordovician Silurian extinction 440
million years ago which wiped out most
marine organisms all the way up to the
extinction events that took out the
dinosaurs and they'll probably survive
the next extinction event - hey I'm
rooming with them what if an asteroid
tore off our ozone layer or the Sun
burst with enough radiation to fry all
humans in under a minute
well yes we'd all be toast but it would
only be mildly inconvenient to the
tardigrade it's important to note that
tardigrades do not adapt to live in
these conditions but rather to survive
them if they were extreme affiliate they
might evolve to consume radiation
instead they curl up and wait until the
radiation has passed at which point they
resume their normal life cycle the
longer the exposure the more likely they
are to die but considering how much
radiation they can survive they'll
probably be fine even in a nuclear war
you and me not so much
even if you did find a way to kill a
tardigrade the odds are you'd end up
dying first in whatever environment you
exposed it to then the tardigrade would
come out of its dormant state and be
just fine and also having the last laugh
most scientists agree that the
tardigrade will outlive all of us we
think they're right number eight it
might survive on another planet we
already know tardigrades can survive
extremely harsh conditions but can they
survive on another planet the answer is
quite possibly yes the conditions on
Mars are within the tardigrades
capabilities to survive assuming that a
sufficient amount of water exists to
support them they are after all
naturally aquatic creatures the search
for life on other planets
has been one of humanity's defining
challenges but it could very well be
that the life were searching for is
really tiny really ancient and really
really tough so did you know about
tardigrades which of their fantastic
powers do you find the hardest to
believe tell us in the comments below
and don't forget to Like share and hit
that subscribe button to stay on the
bright side of life
you